SUMBER: https://www.who.int/news/item/24-04-2019-to-grow-up-healthy-children-need-to-sit-less-and-play-more
DIAMBIL: 2026-10-02T03:16:35.756Z
HTTP: 200

 
 To grow up healthy, children need to sit less and play more
 Skip to main content 
 Global 
 Regions 
 WHO Regional websites 
 Africa 
 Americas 
 South-East Asia 
 Europe 
 Eastern Mediterranean 
 Western Pacific 
 When autocomplete results are available use up and down arrows to review and enter to select. 
 Select language
 Select language 
 English 
 العربية 
 中文 
 Fran&#231;ais 
 Русский 
 Espa&#241;ol 
 Portugu&#234;s 
 Home 
 Health Topics 
 All topics A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 
 Resources 
 Fact sheets 
 Facts in pictures 
 Multimedia 
 Podcasts 
 Publications 
 Questions and answers 
 Tools and toolkits 
 Popular 
 Dengue 
 Endometriosis 
 Excessive heat 
 Herpes 
 Mental disorders 
 Mpox 
 Countries 
 All countries A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 
 Regions 
 Africa 
 Americas 
 Europe 
 Eastern Mediterranean 
 South-East Asia
 Western Pacific 
 WHO in countries 
 Data by country 
 Country presence&#160; 
 Country cooperation strategies&#160; 
 Country office profiles 
 Strengthening country offices&#160; 
 Newsroom 
 Newsroom 
 News releases 
 Statements 
 Campaigns 
 Events 
 Feature stories 
 Speeches 
 Commentaries 
 Photo library 
 Headlines 
 Emergencies 
 In focus 
 Cholera&#160; 
 Ebola disease 
 Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory 
 Middle East 
 Sudan 
 Ukraine 
 Latest 
 Disease Outbreak News 
 Situation reports 
 Rapid risk assessments 
 Weekly Epidemiological Record 
 WHO in emergencies 
 Surveillance 
 Alert and response 
 Operations 
 Research 
 Funding 
 Partners 
 Health emergency appeals 
 International Health Regulations 
 Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee 
 Data 
 Data at WHO 
 Data hub 
 Global Health Estimates 
 Health inequality 
 Global Health Observatory 
 Dashboards 
 Triple Billion Progress 
 Health Inequality Monitor 
 Delivery for impact 
 COVID-19 dashboard 
 Data collection 
 Classifications 
 SCORE 
 Surveys 
 Civil registration and vital statistics 
 Routine health information systems 
 Harmonized health facility assessment 
 GIS centre for health 
 Reports 
 World Health Statistics 
 UHC global monitoring report 
 About WHO 
 About WHO 
 Partnerships 
 Committees and advisory groups 
 Collaborating centres 
 Technical teams 
 Organizational structure 
 Who we are 
 Our work 
 Activities 
 Initiatives 
 General Programme of Work 
 WHO Academy 
 Funding 
 Investment in WHO 
 WHO Foundation 
 Accountability 
 External audit 
 Financial statements 
 Internal audit and investigations&#160; 
 Programme Budget 
 Results reports 
 Governance 
 Governing bodies 
 World Health Assembly 
 Executive Board 
 Member States Portal 
 Home / 
 News / 
 item / 
 To grow up healthy, children need to sit less and play more 
A.Keenan
 &copy; 
 Credits 
 To grow up healthy, children need to sit less and play more 
 New WHO guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep for children under 5 years of age 
 24 April 2019 
 News release 
 Geneva 
 Reading time:
 Children under five must spend less time sitting watching screens, or restrained in prams and seats, get better quality sleep and have more time for active play if they are to grow up healthy, according to new guidelines issued by the World Health Organization (WHO). &ldquo;Achieving health for all means doing what is best for health right from the beginning of people&rsquo;s lives,&rdquo; says WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. &ldquo;Early childhood is a period of rapid development and a time when family lifestyle patterns can be adapted to boost health gains.&rdquo; The new guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep for children under 5 years of age were developed by a WHO panel of experts. They assessed the effects on young children of inadequate sleep, and time spent sitting watching screens or restrained in chairs and prams. They also reviewed evidence around the benefits of increased activity levels. &ldquo;Improving physical activity, reducing sedentary time and ensuring quality sleep in young children will improve their physical, mental health and wellbeing, and help prevent childhood obesity and associated diseases later in life,&rdquo; says Dr Fiona Bull, programme manager for surveillance and population-based prevention of noncommunicable diseases, at WHO. Failure to meet current physical activity recommendations is responsible for more than 5 million deaths globally each year across all age groups. Currently, over 23% of adults and 80% of adolescents are not sufficiently physically active. If h ealthy physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep habits are established early in life, this helps shape habits through childhood, adolescence and into adulthood. &ldquo;What we really need to do is bring back play for children,&rdquo; says Dr Juana Willumsen, WHO focal point for childhood obesity and physical activity. &ldquo;This is about making the shift from sedentary time to playtime, while protecting sleep. &ldquo; The pattern of overall 24-hour activity is key: replacing prolonged restrained or sedentary screen time with more active play, while making sure young children get enough good-quality sleep. Quality sedentary time spent in interactive non-screen-based activities with a caregiver, such as reading, storytelling, singing and puzzles, is very important for child development. The important interactions between physical activity, sedentary behaviour and adequate sleep time, and their impact on physical and mental health and wellbeing, were recognized by the Commission on Ending Childhood Obesity , which called for clear guidance on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep in young children. Applying the recommendations in these guidelines during the first five years of life will contribute to children&rsquo;s motor and cognitive development and lifelong health. Recommendations at a glance: Infants (less than 1 year) should: 
 Normal 
 0 
 false 
 false 
 false 
 EN-GB 
 ZH-CN 
 AR-SA 
 Be physically active several times a day in a variety
of ways , particularly through
interactive floor-based play; more is better. For those not yet mobile, this includes at least 30 minutes in prone position (tummy time) spread throughout
the day while awake. Not be
restrained for more than 1 hour at a time (e.g. prams/strollers, high chairs,
or strapped on a caregiver&rsquo;s back). Screen time is not recommended. When
sedentary, engaging in reading and storytelling with a caregiver is encouraged . Have
14&ndash;17h (0&ndash;3 months of age) or 12&ndash;16h (4&ndash;11 months of age) of good quality
sleep, including naps. Children 1-2 years of age should: Spend at
least 180 minutes in a variety of types of physical activities at any
intensity, i ncluding moderate-to-vigorous-intensity physical activity, spread
throughout the day; more is better. Not be
restrained for more than 1 hour at a time (e.g., prams/strollers, high chairs,
or strapped on a caregiver&rsquo;s back) or sit for extended periods of time. For 1-year-olds, sedentary screen time
(such as watching TV or videos, playing computer games) is not recommended. For
those aged 2 years, sedentary screen time should be no more than 1 hour; less
is better . When sedentary, engaging in reading and storytelling with a
caregiver is encouraged. Have 11-14
hours of good quality sleep , including naps, with regular sleep and
wake-up times. Children 3-4 years of age should : Spend at
least 180 minutes in a variety of types of physical activities
at any intensity, of which at least 60 minutes is moderate- to vigorous
intensity physical activity, spread throughout the day; more is better. Not be
restrained for more than 1 hour at a time (e.g., prams/strollers) or sit for
extended periods of time. Sedentary
screen time should be no more than 1 hour; less is better . When sedentary,
engaging in reading and storytelling with a caregiver is encouraged. Have 10&ndash;13h
of good quality sleep , which may include a nap, with regular sleep
and wake-up times. More information: WHO guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep for children under 5 years of age 
 Media Contacts 
 Tarik Jasarevic 
 Spokesperson / Media Relations
 WHO 
 Telephone: 
 +41227915099 
 Mobile: 
 +41793676214 
 Email: 
 jasarevict@who.int 
 Margaret Harris 
 Mobile: 
 +41 792906688 
 Email: 
 harrism@who.int 
 Paul Garwood 
 Communications Officer
 WHO 
 Telephone: 
 +41227911578 
 Mobile: 
 +41796037294 
 Email: 
 garwoodp@who.int 
 Related 
 WHO guidelines on physical activity, sedentary behaviour and sleep for children under 5 years of age 
 Regions 
 Africa 
 Americas 
 Eastern Mediterranean 
 Europe 
 South-East Asia 
 Western Pacific 
 Policies 
 Cybersecurity 
 Ethics 
 Information disclosure 
 Permissions and licensing 
 Preventing sexual exploitation 
 Terms of use 
 About us 
 Careers 
 Frequently asked questions 
 Library 
 Procurement 
 Publications 
 Contact us 
 Newsletters 
 Report misconduct 
 Privacy policy 
 ©
 2026
 WHO 
